README.md, before:

# Life-CLI

**Lightweight, stateful, CLI-first orchestrator for personal data pipelines**

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

Life-CLI is a tool for orchestrating personal data workflows without the overhead of enterprise solutions like Airflow. It wraps your specialized CLI tools (data sync, transformations, APIs) with YAML configuration, incremental state tracking, and workflow management.

## Why Life-CLI?

**The Problem:** You have multiple CLI tools for different data tasks (syncing APIs, transforming data, updating spreadsheets). You've outgrown bash scripts but don't need a full orchestration platform.

**The Gap:**
- **Bash scripts**: No structure, no state tracking, grows unmaintainable
- **Make/Taskfile**: No incremental state, not designed for data pipelines
- **Airflow/Prefect**: Scheduler-first, web UI overhead, too heavyweight
- **Meltano**: Singer-protocol only, not generalized for any CLI tool

**Life-CLI fills this gap:** Lightweight orchestration for ANY CLI tool, with stateful syncing, triggered on-demand (e.g., from your editor).

## Features

- 🎯 **CLI-first**: Trigger workflows from command line or editor (Neovim, VS Code)
- 📝 **YAML configuration**: Declarative workflow definitions
- 🔄 **Incremental syncing**: Track state between runs, avoid full refreshes
- 🧩 **Tool-agnostic**: Orchestrate any CLI tool, not just specific protocols
- 🏃 **On-demand execution**: No scheduler required, run when you need it
- 🔍 **Dry-run mode**: Preview what will execute before running
- 📦 **Lightweight**: Minimal dependencies (typer, pyyaml)

## Installation

### Using uv (recommended)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/benthepsychologist/life-cli.git
cd life-cli

# Create virtual environment and install
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv pip install -e .
```

### Using pip

```bash
git clone https://github.com/benthepsychologist/life-cli.git
cd life-cli
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -e .
```

### Verify installation

```bash
life --version
# Output: life-cli version 0.1.0
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Create a config file

Create `~/life.yml` or `./life.yml`:

```yaml
workspace: ~/my-data-workspace

sync:
  contacts:
    command: |
      my-crm-tool export contacts
        --format json
        --output {output}
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json
    description: Sync contacts from CRM

  calendar:
    command: |
      my-calendar-tool export
        --from {from_date}
        --to {to_date}
        --output {output}
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json
    date_range: 7d

merge:
  reports:
    contacts_calendar:
      command: |
        jq -s '.[0] + .[1]' {contacts_file} {calendar_file}
      contacts_file: ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json
      calendar_file: ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json
      output: ~/my-data-workspace/merged_report.json

process:
  generate_report:
    command: |
      my-report-tool create
        --input {input}
        --output {output}
    input: ~/my-data-workspace/merged_report.json
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/final_report.pdf

status:
  check_pipeline:
    command: |
      echo "Contacts: $(jq length ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json)"
      echo "Events: $(jq length ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json)"
```

### 2. Run commands

```bash
# Sync data from external sources
life sync contacts

# Merge datasets
life merge reports contacts_calendar

# Process data
life process generate_report

# Check status
life status check_pipeline

# Preview without executing
life --dry-run sync contacts

# Use custom config location
life --config /path/to/config.yml sync contacts

# Verbose logging
life --verbose sync contacts
```

## Commands

### `life sync <task>`
Execute data synchronization tasks. Supports incremental syncing with state tracking.

### `life merge <category> <task>`
Merge and transform datasets using nested task organization.

### `life process <task>`
Process data through transformation pipelines.

### `life status <task>`
Run status checks and generate reports.

### Global Options
- `--config PATH` / `-c PATH`: Path to config file (default: `~/life.yml` or `./life.yml`)
- `--dry-run`: Show what would be executed without running commands
- `--verbose` / `-v`: Enable verbose logging with timestamps

## Configuration Reference

### Sync Tasks

```yaml
sync:
  task_name:
    command: "cli-tool command with {variables}"
    output: ~/output/path.json
    incremental_field: modifiedon        # Field to track for incremental updates
    state_file: ~/.life-state.json       # Where to store sync state
    id_field: id                          # Unique identifier field
    description: "Human-readable description"
```

### Merge Tasks

```yaml
merge:
  category_name:
    task_name:
      command: "transformation command with {input_vars}"
      input_file: ~/path/to/input.json
      output: ~/path/to/output.json
      description: "What this merge does"
```

### Multi-Command Execution

```yaml
process:
  complex_task:
    commands:
      - "command one"
      - "command two"
      - "command three"
    output: ~/final/output.json
```

### Variable Substitution

Life-CLI supports these built-in variables:
- `{output}`: Replaced with the task's output path
- `{from_date}`, `{to_date}`: Calculated from `date_range` config
- `{extra_args}`: Injected for incremental syncs (Step 3 feature)
- Custom variables: Any field in the task config can be referenced

## Development Status

**Current:** Step 2 Complete - Core CLI framework with config loading and subcommands

**Roadmap:**
- ✅ Step 1: Project scaffolding (LICENSE, pyproject.toml, structure)
- ✅ Step 2: Core CLI framework (typer, config loader, subcommands)
- 🚧 Step 3: State management & incremental sync (in progress)
- ⏳ Step 4: Multi-command & workflow support
- ⏳ Step 5: Documentation & examples

See [.specwright/specs/life-cli-initial-spec.md](.specwright/specs/life-cli-initial-spec.md) for the full implementation plan.

## Architecture

Life-CLI follows the Unix philosophy: do one thing well. It orchestrates CLI tools, it doesn't replace them.

```
life-cli:     Orchestration layer (workflows, state, sequencing)
│
├─ dv:        Your Dataverse CLI
├─ msg:       Your email CLI
├─ cal:       Your calendar CLI
├─ my-tool:   Your custom tool
└─ ...        Any CLI tool
```

See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed design philosophy.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development setup.

## Use Cases

Life-CLI was built for personal data management workflows:

- **Clinical practice**: Sync patient sessions, calendar, emails → merge → generate reports
- **Research**: Fetch datasets from multiple APIs → transform → analyze
- **Personal analytics**: Aggregate data from various services → process → visualize
- **Content workflows**: Fetch sources → transform → publish

If you're orchestrating 5-10 specialized CLI tools in a personal workflow, life-cli is for you.

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Related Projects

- **Meltano**: ELT orchestration (Singer protocol, data warehouse focused)
- **Taskfile**: Simple task runner (no state tracking)
- **Airflow**: Enterprise workflow platform (scheduler, web UI, distributed)
- **dbt**: SQL transformation pipelines (database-centric)

Life-CLI sits between bash scripts and enterprise orchestrators, optimized for personal CLI tool workflows.

---

**Status**: Alpha (v0.1.0) - API may change as we implement remaining features

Commit message:

life-cli wrapper with tests and config and validation, hooray!

README.md, after:

# Life-CLI

**Lightweight, stateful, CLI-first orchestrator for personal data pipelines**

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

Life-CLI is a tool for orchestrating personal data workflows without the overhead of enterprise solutions like Airflow. It wraps your specialized CLI tools (data sync, transformations, APIs) with YAML configuration, incremental state tracking, and workflow management.

## Why Life-CLI?

**The Problem:** You have multiple CLI tools for different data tasks (syncing APIs, transforming data, updating spreadsheets). You've outgrown bash scripts but don't need a full orchestration platform.

**The Gap:**
- **Bash scripts**: No structure, no state tracking, grows unmaintainable
- **Make/Taskfile**: No incremental state, not designed for data pipelines
- **Airflow/Prefect**: Scheduler-first, web UI overhead, too heavyweight
- **Meltano**: Singer-protocol only, not generalized for any CLI tool

**Life-CLI fills this gap:** Lightweight orchestration for ANY CLI tool, with stateful syncing, triggered on-demand (e.g., from your editor).

## Features

- 🎯 **CLI-first**: Trigger workflows from command line or editor (Neovim, VS Code)
- 📝 **YAML configuration**: Declarative workflow definitions
- 🔄 **Incremental syncing**: Track state between runs, avoid full refreshes
- 🧩 **Tool-agnostic**: Orchestrate any CLI tool, not just specific protocols
- 🏃 **On-demand execution**: No scheduler required, run when you need it
- 🔍 **Dry-run mode**: Preview what will execute before running
- 📦 **Lightweight**: Minimal dependencies (typer, pyyaml)

## Installation

### Using uv (recommended)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/benthepsychologist/life-cli.git
cd life-cli

# Create virtual environment and install
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv pip install -e .
```

### Using pip

```bash
git clone https://github.com/benthepsychologist/life-cli.git
cd life-cli
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -e .
```

### Verify installation

```bash
life --version
# Output: life-cli version 0.1.0
```

### Shell Completion (Optional)

Life-CLI supports shell completion for bash, zsh, and fish:

```bash
# For bash
life --install-completion bash
source ~/.bashrc

# For zsh
life --install-completion zsh
source ~/.zshrc

# For fish
life --install-completion fish
```

After installation, you can use Tab to autocomplete commands and options.

## Quick Start

### 1. Create a config file

Create `~/life.yml` or `./life.yml`:

```yaml
workspace: ~/my-data-workspace

sync:
  contacts:
    command: |
      my-crm-tool export contacts
        --format json
        --output {output}
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json
    description: Sync contacts from CRM

  calendar:
    command: |
      my-calendar-tool export
        --from {from_date}
        --to {to_date}
        --output {output}
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json
    date_range: 7d

merge:
  reports:
    contacts_calendar:
      command: |
        jq -s '.[0] + .[1]' {contacts_file} {calendar_file}
      contacts_file: ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json
      calendar_file: ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json
      output: ~/my-data-workspace/merged_report.json

process:
  generate_report:
    command: |
      my-report-tool create
        --input {input}
        --output {output}
    input: ~/my-data-workspace/merged_report.json
    output: ~/my-data-workspace/final_report.pdf

status:
  check_pipeline:
    command: |
      echo "Contacts: $(jq length ~/my-data-workspace/contacts.json)"
      echo "Events: $(jq length ~/my-data-workspace/calendar.json)"
```

### 2. Run commands

```bash
# Sync data from external sources
life sync contacts

# Merge datasets
life merge reports contacts_calendar

# Process data
life process generate_report

# Check status
life status check_pipeline

# Preview without executing
life --dry-run sync contacts

# Use custom config location
life --config /path/to/config.yml sync contacts

# Verbose logging
life --verbose sync contacts
```

## Commands

### `life sync <task>`
Execute data synchronization tasks. Supports incremental syncing with state tracking.

### `life merge <category> <task>`
Merge and transform datasets using nested task organization.

### `life process <task>`
Process data through transformation pipelines.

### `life status <task>`
Run status checks and generate reports.

### Global Options
- `--config PATH` / `-c PATH`: Path to config file (default: `~/life.yml` or `./life.yml`)
- `--dry-run`: Show what would be executed without running commands
- `--verbose` / `-v`: Enable verbose logging with timestamps

## Configuration Reference

### Sync Tasks

```yaml
sync:
  task_name:
    command: "cli-tool command with {variables}"
    output: ~/output/path.json
    incremental_field: modifiedon        # Field to track for incremental updates
    state_file: ~/.life-state.json       # Where to store sync state
    id_field: id                          # Unique identifier field
    description: "Human-readable description"
```

### Merge Tasks

```yaml
merge:
  category_name:
    task_name:
      command: "transformation command with {input_vars}"
      input_file: ~/path/to/input.json
      output: ~/path/to/output.json
      description: "What this merge does"
```

### Multi-Command Execution

```yaml
process:
  complex_task:
    commands:
      - "command one"
      - "command two"
      - "command three"
    output: ~/final/output.json
```

### Variable Substitution

Life-CLI supports these built-in variables:
- `{output}`: Replaced with the task's output path
- `{from_date}`, `{to_date}`: Calculated from `date_range` config
- `{extra_args}`: Injected for incremental syncs (Step 3 feature)
- Custom variables: Any field in the task config can be referenced

## Development Status

**Current:** Step 2 Complete - Core CLI framework with config loading and subcommands

**Roadmap:**
- ✅ Step 1: Project scaffolding (LICENSE, pyproject.toml, structure)
- ✅ Step 2: Core CLI framework (typer, config loader, subcommands)
- 🚧 Step 3: State management & incremental sync (in progress)
- ⏳ Step 4: Multi-command & workflow support
- ⏳ Step 5: Documentation & examples

See [.specwright/specs/life-cli-initial-spec.md](.specwright/specs/life-cli-initial-spec.md) for the full implementation plan.

## Architecture

Life-CLI follows the Unix philosophy: do one thing well. It orchestrates CLI tools, it doesn't replace them.

```
life-cli:     Orchestration layer (workflows, state, sequencing)
│
├─ dv:        Your Dataverse CLI
├─ msg:       Your email CLI
├─ cal:       Your calendar CLI
├─ my-tool:   Your custom tool
└─ ...        Any CLI tool
```

See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed design philosophy.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development setup.

## Use Cases

Life-CLI was built for personal data management workflows:

- **Clinical practice**: Sync patient sessions, calendar, emails → merge → generate reports
- **Research**: Fetch datasets from multiple APIs → transform → analyze
- **Personal analytics**: Aggregate data from various services → process → visualize
- **Content workflows**: Fetch sources → transform → publish

If you're orchestrating 5-10 specialized CLI tools in a personal workflow, life-cli is for you.

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Related Projects

- **Meltano**: ELT orchestration (Singer protocol, data warehouse focused)
- **Taskfile**: Simple task runner (no state tracking)
- **Airflow**: Enterprise workflow platform (scheduler, web UI, distributed)
- **dbt**: SQL transformation pipelines (database-centric)

Life-CLI sits between bash scripts and enterprise orchestrators, optimized for personal CLI tool workflows.

---

**Status**: Alpha (v0.1.0) - API may change as we implement remaining features
